\section{From Capacity Utilization to Output-Gap Governance}

The erosion of Bretton Woods capital controls dissolved the territorial anchor of Fordist measurement. As discretionary demand management gave way to rules-based frameworks, macroeconomic statecraft required a new benchmark for economic slack---one capable of circulating across central banks and supranational institutions independently of national industrial surveys. This displacement was not a technical upgrade, but a reorganization of governance around a \textit{portable architecture of slack}. 

The epistemic shift was crystallized in the rational expectations revolution, which redefined the output gap not as a measure of idle resources, but as a deviation from a latent, model-implied natural rate. This was not a clean theoretical rupture, but an instance of \textit{institutional conversion} (Mahoney and Thelen, 2009): the same optimization-stability toolkit that Samuelson had championed to legitimize Keynesian demand management was strategically redeployed to enforce credibility-based discipline. The rhetorical reorientation was captured perfectly by Alan Greenspan at a 173 Brookings symposium, who argued that if a capacity measure did not signal inflationary pressure, ``then I suggest that the numbers are wrong'' (Klein et al., 1973, p. 758). Measurement was no longer tasked with describing reality; it was tasked with enforcing a market-clearing benchmark.

The output gap consolidated not because it solved the measurement problem, but because it could be produced through multiple, mutually reinforcing closure strategies. Actual output is recorded; potential output must be inferred. Whether through statistical filtering (Hodrick and Prescott, 1997), neoclassical production functions (Congressional Budget Office, 2004), or structural VARs (Blanchard and Quah, 1989), each method imposes closure assumptions that mechanically dictate the permissible distance between actual activity and capacity. Methodological divergence masks functional convergence: each route collapses the politics of capacity identification into a single, portable variable, sedimenting across IMF and OECD architectures while its closure assumptions remain systematically unexamined.

The Global Financial Crisis exposed the empirical fragility of this settlement. Post-crisis revisions routinely flipped the sign of the output gap, inverting the policy signals the benchmark was designed to deliver (Cerra et al., 2023). Patching the apparatus required discretionary ``nowcasting'' interventions that steadily eroded the claim to rule-bound expertise on which its depoliticized authority rested. The durability of these practices signals institutional entrenchment, not empirical adequacy. It is within this closure-dependent, revision-prone setting that political economy's search for a structurally identified, accounting-based measure of capacity becomes historically intelligible.