\section{Shaikh’s Structural Identification of Capacity Utilization}

The proxy impasse established in the preceding debates requires a structural measurement route. Shaikh (2016) addresses this by shifting capacity estimation into profitability accounting. Rather than relying on institutional surveys or unobservable potential output, he reconstructs the capital stock through a generalized perpetual inventory method (GPIM) and derives a theoretical capacity path from the accounting link between actual and maximum profit rates at the normal cost of capital. Utilization is then constructed as the residual deviation from this implied output–capital ratio.

This accounting route gains immediate analytical traction through data portability. Because it relies on standard national accounts for output and capital stock, it bypasses institutional survey constraints and applies consistently across jurisdictions. This portability enables robust series construction where physical proxies are unavailable, while embedding the theoretical assumption that normal utilization adjusts to demand conditions rather than remaining fixed by technology.

However, the residual construction establishes an accounting identity but leaves identification open. Defining utilization as a deterministic residual imposes a capacity path without verifying whether the underlying variables actually share a stochastic equilibrium. When identification remains weak, the single-equation estimation becomes unstable, risking the registration of constructed residuals as false cointegration signals. The long-run output–capital coefficient is forced to absorb shifting distributive regimes, generating a highly fragile empirical benchmark.

This article is motivated to critically engage with Shaikh’s cointegration approach to stress-test this fragility. By reinterpreting the long-run output–capital coefficient as a transformation elasticity ($\theta$) linking capital accumulation to productive-capacity formation, this paper evaluates whether a fixed-parameter closure can sustain structural meaning across postwar distributive regimes. The multi-stage replication developed in the following sections demonstrates that the standalone output–capital system fractures due to severe omitted variable bias, proving that valid capacity identification must place distributional variables—specifically, the logged rate of exploitation—directly inside the structural estimation architecture.