\section{From Survey Measures to an Inflation Sentinel: Capacity Utilization during the Fordist Era}

Making idle productive capacity visible preceded its stabilization as a macroeconomic variable. Early efforts, such as the Brookings Institution’s 1930s studies, immediately revealed a tension between engineering definitions of maximum throughput and economic notions of sustainable operation (Burns, 1954; Klein and David, 1958). As postwar stabilization policy required a metric to translate idle capacity into intervention thresholds, capacity utilization filled that role. However, the measure that became institutionalized was not anchored in physical reality.

McGraw--Hill’s plant-and-equipment surveys regularized managerial reports of ``preferred'' operating rates, translating heterogeneous capacity definitions into a standardized reporting stream (Butler, 1958; Phillips, 1963). Crucially, this institutionalization was not a neutral technical upgrade. McGraw--Hill operated as a central node in the informational infrastructure of monopoly capital, leveraging its expanding business intelligence networks to anchor the measure’s legitimacy in corporate forecasting and policy debate (Baran and Sweezy, 1988; Munroe, 2007). By sedimenting these administrative routines, the survey marginalized deeper methodological debates and physically anchored alternatives, effectively naturalizing subjective managerial expectations as the de facto statistical fact of economic slack.

The Federal Reserve subsequently embedded these survey-based benchmarks into the Industrial Production program, a choice reflecting administrative path dependence and institutional reach rather than empirical superiority. Physically anchored alternatives---such as Foss's (1963) Electric Motors Utilization or Taubman and Gottschalk's (1971) Average Workweek of Capital---tracked operational realities more directly but were systematically marginalized. The stagflationary crisis of the 1970s did not dismantle this survey routine; it recoded its policy function. Mounting inflation detached capacity utilization from its role as a demand-slack indicator and repositioned it as an inflation sentinel. This durability did not resolve the underlying identification problem. Instead, it cleared institutional space for a new governance architecture---one that would displace survey-centered utilization with output-gap benchmarks portable across central banks, a transition detailed in the following section.